100 MCQ's on Constitution of India:- Part:-001


1. The Governor of a State is appointed by the President on the advice of the

(a) Prime Minister

(b) Vice-President

(c) Chief Minister

(d) Chief Justice

Answer: Prime Minister 

2. The President gives his resignation to the

(a) Chief Justice

(b) Parliament

(c) Vice President

(d) Prime Minister

Answer: Vice President 

3. For what period does the Vice President of India hold office ?

(a) 5 years

(b) Till the age of 65 years

(c) 6 years

(d) 2 years

Answer: 5 years 

4. Who among the following holds office during the pleasure of the President?

(a) Governor

(b) Election Commissioner

(c) Speaker of Lok Sabha

(d) Prime Minister

Answer: Governor 

5. Which of the following is not true regarding the payment of the emoluments of the President?

(a) They can be reduced during a Financial Emergency.

(b) They are shown separately in the budget.

(c) They are charged on the Contigency Fund of India.

(d) They do not require any parliament sanction.

Answer: They are charged on the Contigency Fund of India. 

6. The total number of members nominated by the President to the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha is

(a) 16

(b) 18

(c) 14

(d) 12

Answer: 14 

7. Which one of the following does not constitute the electoral college for electing the President of India?
(a) Elected members of Lok Sabha
(b) Elected members of the Legislative Assembly of each state.
(c) Elected members of the Legislative Council
(d) Elected members of Rajya Sabha
Answer: Elected members of the Legislative Council
8. The council of Ministers in a Parliamentary type of Government can remain in office till it
enjoys the support of the
(a) Minority of members of the Upper House of Parliament
(b) Majority of the members of the Upper House of Parliament
(c) Minority of members of the Lower House
(d) Majority of the members of the Lower House of Parliament
Answer: Majority of the members of the Lower House of Parliament
9. Which of the following appointments is not made by the President of India?
(a) Chief of the Army
(b) Speaker of the Lok Sabha
(c) Chief Justice of India
(d) Chief of the Air Force
Answer: Speaker of the Lok Sabha
10. Who appoints the Prime Minister of India?
(a) Lok Sabha
(b) President
(c) Parliament
(d) Citizens of India
Answer: President
11. The first woman Governor of a state in free India was
(a) Mrs. Indira Gandhi
(b) Mrs. Vijaya Laxmi Pandit
(c) Mrs. Sarojini Naidu
(d) Mrs. Sucheta Kripalani
Answer: Mrs. Sarojini Naidu
12. Minimum age required to contest for Presidentship is
(a) 23 years
(b) 21 years
(c) 35 years
(d) 30 years
Answer: 35 years
13. The charge of impeachment against the President of India for his removal can be preferred by
(a) Both Houses of Parliament
(b) Speaker of Lok Sabha and Chairman of Rajya Sabha (c) Rajya Sabha
(d) Lok Sabha
Answer: Both Houses of Parliament
14. The Chief Minister of a Union Territory where such a set up exists, is appointed by the
(a) Lt. Governor
(b) Majority party in Legislature
(c) President
(d) Prime Minister
Answer: Lt. Governor
15. Who was the first Prime Minister of India ?
(a) Jawaharlal Nehru
(b) Mrs. Indira Gandhi
(c) Dr. Rajendra Prasad
(d) Mahatma Gandhi
Answer: Jawaharlal Nehru
16. In case a President dies while in office, the vice President can act as President for a
maximum period of
(a) 1 years
(b) 3 months
(c) 6 months
(d) 2 years
Answer; 6 months
17. The Union Council of Ministers consists of
(a) Cabinet Ministers, Minister of State and Deputy Ministers
(b) Cabinet Ministers and Chief Ministers of the States
(c) Prime Minister
(d) Cabinet Ministers
Answer: Cabinet Ministers, Minister of State and Deputy Ministers
18. Who administers the oath of office to the President of India before he enters upon the office ?
(a) Chief Justice
(b) Speaker
(c) Vice President
(d) Prime Minister
Answer: Chief Justice
19. Who among the following enjoys the rank of a Cabinet Minister of the Indian Union?
(a) None of the Above
(b) Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission
(c) Deputy Chairman, Rajya Sabha
(d) Secretary to the Government of India
Answer: Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission 20. A person who is not a member of Parliament can be appointed as a Minister by the President for a maximum period of

(a) 9 months

(b) 3 months

(c) 12 months

(d) 6 months

Answer: 6 months

21. When can a President use his discretion in appointing the Prime Minister?

(a) When no political oarty enjoys a clear majority in the Lok Sabha.

(b) Only when the Lok Sabha has been dissolved.

(c) In all circumstances

(d) In no circumstances

Answer: When no political oarty enjoys a clear majority in the Lok Sabha.

22. If in a country there happens to be the office of monarchy as well as a Parliamentary form of government this monarch will be called

(a) Head of the State

(b) Head of the Cabinet

(c) Head of the government

(d) Both Head of the government and State

Answer: Head of the State

23. One feature distinguishing the Rajya Sabha from the Vidhan Parishad is

(a) Power of impeachment

(b) Indirect election

(c) Nomination of members

(d) Tenure of membership

Answer: Power of impeachment

24. Chief Ministers of all the states are ex-officio members of the

(a) Planning Commission

(b) National Development Council

(c) Inter State Council

(d) Finance Commission

Answer: Inter State Council

25. Who, among the following, has the final right to sanction the expenditure of public money in India?

(a) Speaker

(b) President

(c) Prime Minister

(d) Parliament

Answer: President 26. Which of the following is not an essential qualification for appointment as a Governor?
(a) He must not be a member of either House of Parliament.
(b) He should be a domicile of the state to which he is being appointed.
(c) He should be a citizen of India.
(d) He must have completed the age of 35 years
Answer: He should be a domicile of the state to which he is being appointed.
27. The President nominates 12 members of the Rajya Sabha according to
(a) Their performance as office bearers of cultural societies.
(b) The recommendations made by the Vice President.
(c) Their role played in political set up of the country.
(d) Their distinction in the field of science, art, literature and social service.
Answer: Their distinction in the field of science, art, literature and social service.
28. Which Article of the Constitution empowers the President to appoint a Commission to
investigate the condition of backward classes in general and suggest ameliorative measures?
(a) Art 342
(b) Art 344
(c) Art 340
(d) Art 339
Answer: Art 340
29. Who can initiate impeachment proceedings against the President of India?
(a) Either House of Parliament
(b) Any Vidhan Sabha
(c) Only Lok Sabha
(d) Rajya Sabha
Answer: Either House of Parliament
30. Who was the member of the Rajya Sabha when first appointed as the Prime Minister of
India?
(a) Lal Bahadur Shastri
(b) Charan Singh
(c) Morarji Desai
(d) Indira Gandhi
Answer: Indira Gandhi
31. What is the minimum age for appointment as a Governor?
(a) 35 years
(b) 40 years
(c) 25 years
(d) 30 years
Answer: 35 years
32. Chief Minister of a State is responsible to
(a) Prime Minister 

(b) Rajya Sabha (c) Legislative Assembly (d) Governor Answer; Legislative Assembly 

33. The administrative and operational control of the Armed Forces is exercised by the (a) Cabinet Committee on Political Affairs with Prime Minister as the Chairman (b) Ministry of Defence (c) Three Chiefs of the Army, Navy and Air Force Staff (d) President Answer: Ministry of Defence 

34. What is the position of a Minister of State in the Central Government? (a) He is a Minister of Central Government but not a member of the Cabinet. (b) He looks after the interests of the State Cabinet. (c) He is the nominee of the State Governor. (d) He is the nominee of the State Cabinet. Answer: IIe is a Minister of Central Government but not a member of the Cabinet. 

35. Who among the following is directly responsible to Parliament for all matters concerning the Defence Services of India? (a) President (b) Prime Minister (c) Defence Minister (d) Cabinet Committee on Political Affairs Answer: Defence Minister 

36. How many times the President of India can seek re-election to his post ? (a) Once (b) 3 times (c) 2 times (d) Any number of times Answer; Any number of times 

37. Who among the following has the power to form a new state within the Union of India? (a) Speaker of Lok Sabha (b) President (c) Prime Minister (d) Supreme Court Answer: President 

38. Is the Prime Minister bound to advise the President on matters on which his advice is sought ? (a) If the Council of Ministers so desires. (b) Yes (c) No 

(d) It is discretionary
Answer: Yes
39. When the Vice President officiates as President he draws the salary of
(a) Chairman of Rajya Sabha
(b) Both (A) and (C)
(c) President
(d) Member of Parliament
Answer: President
40. Who among the following can attend meetings of the Union Cabinet ?
(a) President
(b) Cabinet Ministers
(c) Ministers of State
(d) Deputy Ministers
Answer: Cabinet Ministers
41. Who among the following has the Constitutional authority to make rules and regulations
fixing the number of members of the UPSC
(a) Vice- President
(b) President
(c) Home Ministry
(d) Cabinet Secretary
Answer: President
42. Under whose advice the President of India declares Emergency under Article 352 ?
(a) Chief Ministers of all states
(b) Prime Minister
(c) Cabinet
(d) Council of Ministers
Answer: Cabinet
43. Who acts as the President of India when neither the President nor the Vice President is
available ?
(a) Seniormost Governor of a State
(b) Chief Justice of India
(c) Speaker of Lok Sabha
(d) Auditor General of India
Answer: Chief Justice of India
44. A proclamation of emergency issued under Article 36 must be approved by the Parliament
within
(a) 3 months
(b) 2 months
(c) 1 Month
(d) 6 weeks 45. The Union Council of Ministers is appointed by the

(a) President of India according to his discretion

(b) President of India on the advice of the Prime Minister

(c) Prime Minister of India

(d) Parliament

Answer: President of India on the advice of the Prime Minister 

46. The President can proclaim emergency on the written advice of the

(a) Speaker of Lok Sabha

(b) Prime Minister

(c) Chief Justice of India

(d) Union Cabinet

Answer: Prime Minister 

47. The Union Council of Ministers is collectively responsible to

(a) Rajya Sabha

(b) President

(c) House of the People

(d) Prime Minister

Answer: House of the People 

48. Article 78 of the Constitution deals with

(a) President's power to get information from the Council of Ministers.

(b) Prime Minister's duty regarding keeping the President informed about the government's decisions and policies.

(c) Emergency powers of the President

(d) President's power to send advisory messages to the Parliament.

Answer: President's power to send advisory messages to the Parliament. 

49. The maximum duration for which the Vice President may officiate as the President, is

(a) 1 year

(b) 6 months

(c) 4 months

(d) 9 months

Answer: 6 months. 

50. The President's Rule in a State can be continued for a maximum period of

(a) 2 years

(b) 1 year

(c) 6 months

(d) 2 1/2 years

Answer: 6 months 

51. The Chairman and members of State Public Service Commission are appointed by the President
(b) Chairman, UPSC
(c) Governor
(d) Prime Minister
Answer: Prime Minister
52. When a State Governor dies or resigns, who normally exercises his functions till a new
Governor is appointed?
(a) Chief Justice of the High Court
(b) Advocate General of the State
(c) Secretary General of the Governor
(d) A person designated by State Cabinet
Answer; Chief Justice of the High Court
53. When a financial emergency is proclaimed
(a) Union budget will not be presented
(b) Salaries and allowances of any class of employees may be reduced
(c) Repayment of government debts will stop
(d) Payment of salaries to public servants will be postponed
Answer: Salaries and allowances of any class of employees may be reduced
54. Who appoints the Chairman of the UPSC ?
(a) President
(b) Speaker of Lok Sabha
(c) Chief Justice of India
(d) Prime Minister
Answer: President
55. Which of the following is correct regarding the Governor of a State?
(a) All of the above
(b) He can recommend to the President to impose President's Rule in the State.
(c) No money bill can be introduced in the State Legislature without his prior permission.
(d) He has the power of issuing ordinances when the legislature is not in session.
Answer: All of the above
56. If the President wants to resign from office, he may do so by writing to the
(a) Chief Justice of India
(b) Speaker of Lok Sabha
(c) Prime Minister
(d) Vice-President
Answer: Vice-President
57. Is the Prime Minister bound to advise is sought?
(a) Yes, if the Council of Ministers so desires
(b) Yes
(c) No (d) It is discretionary
Answer: Yes
58. The five year term of the President is calculated from the
(a) First day of the month following the month he assumes charge
(b) Date of his election result
(c) Day he assumes charge
(d) First day of the month he assumes charge
Answer: Day he assumes charge
59. Who is the ex- officio Chairman of the Council of States ?
(a) Vice- President
(b) Leader of the opposition
(c) President
(d) Speaker
Answer: Vice- President
60. Under which Article of the Constitution is the President's rule promulgated on any state in
India?
(a) 326
(b) 370
(c) 380
(d) 356
Answer: 356
61. At a time, President's rule can be imposed on a state for a maximum period of
(a) 1 year
(b) 5 years
(c) 2 years
(d) 4 years
Answer: 1 year
62. The Chairman of the Planning Commission in India is the
(a) President
(b) Prime Minister
(c) Minister of Planning
(d) Finance Minister
Answer: Prime Minister
63. When Parliament is not in session, the President can promulgate an ordinance which is to be
ratified by the Parliament within
(a) 6 weeks from the reassembly of Parliament
(b) 6 months from the reassembly of the Parliament
(c) 6 weeks from the date of issue of ordinance.
(d) 3 months from the date of issue of the ordinance.
Answer: 6 weeks from the reassembly of Parliament 64. The President of India is elected by an electoral college comprising of

(a) Elected members of Lok Sabha and State Legislative Assemblies.

(b) Elected member of both Houses of Parliament and State Legislative Assembly

(c) Elected members of both Houses of Parliament.

(d) Elected member of State Legislative Assemblies

Answer; Elected member of both Houses of Parliament and State Legislative Assembly

65. If the office of the President of India falls vacant, within what time should the next President

be elected ?

(a) Within 2 months

(b) Within 1 year

(c) Within 6 months

(d) Immediately

Answer: Within 6 months

66. The President can proclaim a state of emergency in case of

(a) All of the above

(b) Threat to financial stability of the country.

(c) External aggression or internal disturbances threatening the security of the country.

(d) Failure of Constitutional machinery in a particular state.

Answer: All of the above

67. In the election of the President, the value of the vote of the Lok Sabha members

(a) Differs according to the geographical size of the respective state.

(b) None of these

(c) Differs according to the number of votes a member represents.

(d) is same

Answer: Differs according to the number of votes a member represents.

68. The Indian President is

(a) None of these

(b) Titular executive

(c) Real executive

(d) Real/Titular executive

Answer; Titular executive

69. The minimum age required for becoming the Prime Minister of India is

(a) 30 years

(b) 35 years

(c) 40 years

(d) 25 years

Answer: 25 years

70. The President may for violation of the Constitution be removed from the office by

(a) The Prime Minister (b) The Electoral College consisting of members of Parliament and the State Legislatures.

(c) Impeachment

(d) A no- confidence vote.

Answer: Impeachment

71. In which of the following situations does the President act in his own discretion?

(a) In returning a proposal to the Council of Ministers for reconsideration

(b) None of the Above

(c) In appointing the Prime Minister

(d) Both of these

Answer: In returning a proposal to the Council of Ministers for reconsideration

72. The Prime Minister, Union Cabinet Minister, Chief Minister and Council of Ministers are all

members of

(a) National Development Council

(b) Regional Council

(c) Planning Commission

(d) Zonal Council

Answer: National Development Council

73. The President's Rule in a state means that the state is ruled by

(a) A caretaker government

(b) The Chief Minister nominated by the President

(c) The Governor of the State

(d) The President directly

Answer: The Governor of the State

74. The Chief - Minister of a Union Territory whenever such a set up exists, is appointed by

(a) The Lt. Governor

(b) The majority party in the legislature

(c) The President

(d) The Prime Minister

Answer: The Lt. Governor

75. Under what article of the Constitution of India can the President take over the administration

of a state in case its constitutional machinery breaks down?

(a) Art 352

(b) Art 343

(c) Art 356

(d) Art 83

Answer: Art 356

76. The President can make laws through ordinances

(a) Only on subjects contained in the concurrent list

(b) Under no circumstances

(c) On certain subjects even when Parliament is in session. 

(d) During the recess of the Parliament

Answer; During the recess of the Parliament

77. Which of the following qualification is not essential for a person to become the Vice-

President ?

(a) He must be an Indian.

(b) He must be qualified to be a member of the Rajya Sabha.

(c) He must not be less than 35 years.

(d) He must be a graduate.

Answer: He must be a graduate.

78. How many types of Emergency have been visualised in the Constitution of India ?

(a) Four

(b) Three

(c) One

(d) Two

Answer: Three

79. The impeachment proceedings against the Vice- President can be initiated

(a) Only in Lok Sabha

(b) In neither Hosue of Parliament

(c) In either House of Parliament

(d) Only in Rajya Sabha

Answer: Only in Rajya Sabha

80. Who appoints the Governor of Jammu and Kashmir?

(a) Chief Minister of the State

(b) Prime Minister

(c) Chief Justice of the High Court

(d) President

Answer: President

81. The President of India can be removed from his office by the

(a) Parliament

(b) Chief Justice of India

(c) Prime Minister

(d) Lok Sabha

Answer: Parliament

82. If the President returns a Bill sent to him for his assent and the Parliament once again passes

the Bill in its original form, then the President

(a) Can seek the opinion of the Supreme Court on the bill

(b) Gives assent to the bill

(c) Can once again return the bill for further reconsideration

(d) Can ask for a referendum on the bill

Answer: Gives assent to the bill

83. If a Minister loses a no- confidence motion, then

(a) Lok Sabha is dissolved

(b) Only Prime Minister and that Minister resigns.

(c) The whole Council of Ministers resigns

(d) The Minister resigns


Answer: The whole Council of Ministers resigns

84. The only instance when the President of India exercised his power of veto related to the

(a) Indian Post Office (Amendment Bill)

(b) Dowry Prohibition Bill

(c) Hindu Code Bill

(d) PEPSU Appropriation Bill


Answer: Indian Post Office (Amendment Bill)

85. The control of the preparation of electoral rolls for parliament and legislature vests with the

(a) President

(b) Election Commision

(c) Cabinet

(d) Prime Minister


Answer: Election Commision

86. What is contained in the tenth schedule of the constitution?

(a) Languages recognised by constitution

(b) Forms of oath or affirmation

(c) Laws that cannot be challenged in any court of law

(d) Provision regarding disqualification on grounds of defection


Answer: Provision regarding disqualification on grounds of defection

87. The Election commision holds election for

(a) The Parliament, State Legislature and the posts of the president and the Vice-President

(b) The parliament, State legislative Assemblies and the State Council

(c) The Parliament

(d) The parliament and the State Legislative Assemblies


Answer: The Parliament, State Legislature and the posts of the president and the Vice-President

88. For Election to the lok sabha, a nomination paper can be field by

(a) Any citizen of India

(b) Any citizen of India whose name appears in the electoral roll of a Constituency

(c) Anyone residing in India

(d) A resident of the Constituency from which the election to be contested


Answer: Any citizen of India whose name appears in the electoral roll of a Constituency

89. In India, political parties are given recognition by

(a) Election Commision

(b) Speaker of Lok Sabha

(c) President

(d) Law Commision

Answer: Election Commission

90. The Vice President is elected by an Electoral College consisting of members of

(a) Both Houses of Parliament and state legislative

(b) Both Houses of Parliament

(c) Lok Sabha

(d) Rajya Sabha

Answer: Both Houses of Parliament

91. The election Commision dose not conduct the elections to the

(a) Lok Sabha

(b) President's election

(c) Rajya Sabha

(d) Local Bodies

Answer: Local Bodies

92. The maximum age prescribed for election as president is

(a) No such Limit

(b) 62 years

(c) 58 years

(d) 60 years

Answer: No such Limit

93. The power to decide an election petition is vested in the

(a) High Court

(b) Election Commission

(c) Parliament

(d) Supreme Court

Answer: Election Commission

94. To elect the President of India, which one of the following election procedures is used?

(a) System of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote

(b) Secondary voting system

(c) Proportional representation through list system

(d) Collective Voting system

Answer: System of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote

95. In which year were the first general election held in India?

(a) 1950-51

(b) 1948-49

(c) 1951-52

(d) 1947-48

Answer: 1951-52 96. Election to the house of the people and the Legislative Assemblies of States in India are
conducted on the basis of
(a) Single Transferable vote
(b) Propotional Representation
(c) Limited sufferage
(d) Adult Franchise
Answer: Adult Franchise
97. Who appoint the Chief Election Commissioner of India?
(a) Chief Justice of India
(b) President
(c) Prime Minister
(d) Parliament
Answer: President
98. Which among the following is not a part of the electoral reforms ?
(a) Installation of electronic voting machines
(b) Appoinment of election Commissioner
(c) Registration of Political parties
(d) Disquallifying the offenders
Answer: Installation of electronic voting machines
99. Recognition to a political party is accorded by
(a) The Election Commision
(b) A Committee of Whips
(c) The ministry of parliament Affours
(d) The speaker of the Lok Sabha in the case of national Parties and the Speaker of Legislative
assemblies in the case of regional parties
Answer: The Election Commision
100. The Chief Minister of a state in India is not eligible to vote in the Presidential election if
(a) IIe is a member of the Upper House of the State Legislature
(b) He is a caretaker Chief Minister
(c) He himself is a candidate
(d) He is yet to prove his majority on the floor of the Lower House of the state Legislature
Answer: He is a member of the Upper House of the State Legislature 
